Once around the Wincham
meteorite. This is a story of a
meteorite that fell in the UK in the
village of Winken in
Glstersha during the lockdown period in
February of 2021 on Sunday the 28th of
that month. Just before 10:00 at night,
2154 UTC, universal time, same as
Greenwich
Meantime, a large chunk of space rock
weighing 13 kg came into the atmosphere
at 13 12,000 m/ second, many times the
speed of a rifle
bullet. And it was a beautiful clear
night. And what was able to be seen all
over the UK was this amazing fireball
that was picked up by the six cameras of
the UK Fireball Alliance. Many, many
doorbell and other CCTV cameras recorded
it and thousands of people witnessed the
event all over the UK. The reports came
in and this allowed triangulation from
all the different aspects and the known
positions of the cameras to work out the
path of the meteor and where it was
likely to have reached the ground. You
could calculate the angle of descent
down and a likely landing zone. So
somewhere just to the east of Gloucester
in the with the village of Wincham being
in the central part of the likely
landing
zone. And in fact it landed in a
perfectly ordinary housing
estate. Say 10:00 at night. Rob and
Katherine Wilcox were downstairs in
their house and didn't hear a thing.
Their adult daughter Hannah was upstairs
in her room and heard a clattering noise
which she assumed was something
happening on the roof. But in the
morning she and Catherine spotted a pile
of rocks and dirt and rubble on the
driveway and the impact scar. And you
can see that in the bottom of the
picture there with the wooden frame put
around it to keep people from standing
on it. this black stain on the
tarmac and this was the impact of one of
the large
fragments. The uh object had exploded in
midair as is often the case with these
rather loosely held together space
rocks. They're sort of glued together
with ice and as the shock of impact
tends to tear them apart and you get a
strewn field as it's called as the
shotgun blast of fragments comes down
over a reasonable
area. Now, as I say, this was in 2021
when the UK was in lockdown and it was
somewhat difficult to get permission to
organize a search, but that was done um
on the grounds that well, as you can
see, they're maintaining social
distancing whilst searching across
Cleave Hill here, looking for any of the
objects that might have come down.
And in fact, this young lady here called
Mira found a 103 g chunk seen in the
photograph there on the grassland. Very
exciting. Quite a big piece. But later
the largest single piece of 152 grams
was found that the search team came
across. It put out a public appeal and
overall just over half a kilogram was
recovered from all of the fragments.
There was a 300 g of material recovered
from the driveway and the lawn belonging
to the willoxes. As I say, 150 g piece
on nearby farmland and numerous smaller
fragments as well. So it started to add
up to a reasonable collection. And here
is a photograph on the right of a lot of
the pieces all bagged up and labeled and
some of the larger pieces on the left
there ready to be
analyzed. If you looked at the
distribution of sizes, there were, as
we've said, a couple of fairly sizable
pieces, but an awful lot of them
weighing less than a gram. So, uh, this
is fairly typical that you get this
fragmentation in the air and, uh, just a
few large pieces and an awful lot of
small pieces make it to the
earth. Now, when they come down, it's
important from a scientific point of
view to locate them rapidly. Uh, and
this was why it was so important to get
that search team out there and try and
find the
material. Yep. The oxygen in our
atmosphere starts to get at the
materials. Oxidation sets in, starts
to turn
the original chemical materials, the
metals oxidized to rust and uh the water
can also get in and you can see that in
these two pictures. In fact, in the top
picture, you can see little salt cubes
that have been growing inside the
surface as a result of a bit of water
getting in and recristallizing some of
the materials, forming those salt cubes
that you can see. But you can also see
how uh in the lower colored microraph,
the cracks in the material have been
allowing water to get in and uh crack
apart further as the temperature goes up
and down. Um eating away at the surface
of the meteorite and uh creating various
terrestrial minerals, sulfates, uh bit
of calite there. You've even got a bit
of soil that's been impacted into a
larger crevice on the the meteorite. So
the central part of the meteorite fairly
pristine, but you can see where it's
been marked in red all the earthly
material being getting into the cracks
there.
Now from just uh fairly locally to me in
Cambridge there's a team called the East
Anglian Astrophysical Research
Organization led by a guy called Jason
Williams who also decided to set up a
search. These guys have a bunker on the
former American air base at RAF Alenbury
just up near Huntington. And they use
radio beam signals and the interaction
of those beams with the ionization
trails left by meteors in the upper
atmosphere to track the path of meteors.
and they had done an analysis of the
track of the winchkin meteor and decided
actually that they disagreed slightly
with the landing zone. They thought that
the object was coming down a little bit
away from where the main search had been
organized and so they decided to try and
get permission to organize a search.
Now, this took some doing, but uh they
were able to do so. And there's a couple
of the team members up there in the
left. And the fragments that they found,
they particularly uh were able to, as I
say, get permission from Chukesby
Council to go and organize the search.
And uh a guy called Derek Robson, an
analytical chemist by trade, found this
charcoal black chunk just near the
village of
Woodmancoat where they had made their
prediction. And you can see in the
second photograph here that we have the
site um where they had produced their
track marked in yellow and they were
able to get permission to search these
two green areas um and uh found the
objects somewhat fragmented but clearly
this dark material lying against the
rather sandy background was fairly easy
to see that it was an interloper.
So here's a picture of some of the
fragments, the main bit at the top there
and some of the other pieces that were
collected. Quite a reasonable hall in
fact and these were sent off to
University to a lab in Cambridge and to
Sheffield University for analysis.
The first spectral analysis shown in
this little animation here
produced results for different elements
showing the trace response as you
scanned across the uh and saw the uh
sodium, the calcium, magnesium and iron
responses there from the sample. So very
uh useful indeed. This was from the
light emitted by the meteor. doesn't
look colored to the eye very it looks
pretty much white because there is a
very wide spectrum but the spectral
analysis of the pictures did show
different lines from different elements
being present before it reached the
ground and that's very useful in terms
of calibrating the uh results. The
camera here was uh designed for this. It
was fitted with a defraction grating in
order to be able to take the spectrum of
anything it could trace rather than just
simply record the uh overall
picture. And then we have a lovely 3D
scan of the Woodman coat meteor right
fragment. The chunk that was found by
Ero
um and uh ah most excellent isn't it
really gives you a sense of what this
fragment was
like. Now the chemical analysis results
showed that there were the usual
expectation of minerals there. So
olivine that's a very common mineral and
serpentine which is one of the products
of the degradation of olivine and we'll
come back to that 3 and a half% carbon
and quite wet 11% of the uh minerals
were hydrated so uh a lot of water
locked up in this object as
well by subjecting it to x-rays you can
work out uh the percentages of all the
metals
So the highest was iron at 41% and then
22% magnesium. Silicon kicks in next.
Then nickel, sulfur, chlorine and so on
down into the small percentages there
all the way down that table. You can
read it very easily. Um this is a very
good way of identifying the individual
elements that are present but not how
they're bound together. The X-ray
fluorescent relies on the innermost
electron inside the atom rather than
worrying about its chemical environment
and what it's bound
to. Again, we've got an electron
microraph here of a fragment revealing
some of the little condrils and the
calcium aluminium
ion inclusions, the CIS that are present
in the meteorite. again confirming that
it's a a condrite meteorite and uh
beginning to sort of get an idea of
where this has come
from. Analysis of the oxygen isotopes.
So normal oxygen is atomic mass 16,
eight protons and eight neutrons. But
you can get oxygen 17 with one extra and
oxygen 18 with two extra neutrons. And
if you compare the ratio of 170 to 180,
then plot it on a chart, then different
meteors end up showing different
results. And uh you can see that here
with this chart with the different
classes of meteorites. And the winch
meteorite matches the CM condrites, the
blue circles in the middle of the chart
there. And the the winch ones are the
yellow squares with a black cross
through. So absolutely central to the CN
condrite oxygen ratio. So again we've
seen the condrils and we can match it to
the same group of uh
meteorites. Also present lots of very
interesting organics. So cyclic
hydrocarbons detected with multiple
rings. So two rings, three rings, four
rings in quite high numbers and uh so
on. And again we've got a plot here
showing the fingerprint of the
percentages of those
polyaromatics for the wincha meteorite
with the black circles and for the local
soil. and then for other
different meteorites from elsewhere just
for comparison. And again, it seems to
fit very closely with the Merchesen
samples and uh the uh the others that
are shown there confirming that it's a
CM type
condrite. Samples sent down to Royal Hol
were analyzed by Dr. churn here and uh
confirmed the presence of organic
molecules including amino acids and uh
the that's a very interesting fact from
the point of view of the origin of life
because again it shows that these space
rocks do have complex chemistry all the
way through to and including amino acids
and possibly beyond. Um so quite
interesting indeed but she was able to
show that the most abundant uh amino
acids that she found so alpha amino
isobuteric acid and isoalene
particularly were present as what's
called a recemic mixture. So a mixture
of the left-handed and right-handed
versions. Now that suggests a
nonbiological op origin for these these
have come from the meteorite in space
and been formed by some non- selective
processes that don't care about left and
right. Whereas biology on earth has
selected the left-handed form um as the
uh the one true way of doing everything
as far as we know. And so uh um this is
uh not suggesting that there was a sign
of life on the meteorite, but that it
was a sign of chemistry producing these
compounds. But another lovely analysis
here. It's actually a CT scan through
the object. And again, you can see how
the surface edge there has already
suffered damage with all those crevices
being penetrating into the surface of
the object. Um, and you can see
the structure within it. Run it through
again, showing the crystals and one or
two of these round condrils which appear
and disappear as the 3D scan works its
way top to bottom in front of our eyes
here. That was uh from the University of
Sheffield and thanks to them for letting
us use this
video. So the percentage of carbon and
the chemical analysis done so far tells
us this is a CM2 carbonacious condrite
and that's quite rare. Just 5% of
meteorites that are collected are of
this type. And again it was important to
do this
quickly. We also see ele uh evidence of
shock. So some of the very small grains
of crystals have got fractures in them
that suggest supersonic shock waves
passing through the material. And this
is all pointing to the fact that these
lumps of condrite that come to earth
were once part of a larger object that
was then shattered and destroyed out
there in the asteroid belt.
And what's interesting with these guys
is that measurement of cosmic ray
exposure, which when a cosmic ray
smashes into these crystals, it can
leave a little trace. And that can be
detected, but it's erased if the
material is melted. So the last time
this stuff was melted seems to be about
2 million years ago. So, this is
pointing to a relatively
recent cosmic train wreck that led to
these chunks coming our
way. And by further backtracking the
observations from different sites, you
can create a 3D trajectory coming in
down over the UK. And that can help us
to point back to the orbital path of
this fragment that came in from outer
space. And it's marked as W on this
chart. Here we have the solar system
objects with the large planet
uh of the solar system. Jupiter at the
outside edge there. We've got Mars,
Earth um and so on. The sun in the
center and you can see that W marching
winchum is moving into the intersect
with the Earth shown as the blue dot
there and out into the asteroid belt.
And so we could work out where it must
have come
from. And this points back to the
asteroid belt. And the samples where
they have not been chemically modified
by melting show very strong similarities
to the asteroid Ryugu. Samples of which
were brought back to Earth by the Hobusa
2 probe from Japan. And that we know
dates all the way back to the dawn of
the solar system. So that's where the
condrils and so forth have come from.
They came from the pre-olar material
that was making up the very original
nebula out of which all of the planets
and the asteroids and the sun and
everything else condensed uh to form the
solar system in the first place. Um, but
obviously what's happened here is that
the material got together into a fairly
significant size body. Not so large that
it would have fully melted and fully
differentiated with all of the iron
sinking to the core, but large enough
that then a later collision was able to
create those evidence of shock. um and
that some warming had had gone on um
with the signs of uh the water and the
hydrated minerals on this the uh
fragment that was picked up there in
Wincham. And finally, just as a piece of
fun, they dug out the piece of
driveway, the the small crater. They
they cut out a 1 m square, and you can
go and visit that. That's now in the
Natural History Museum in London. So you
can see the uh the crater but not in
Winkum on the driveway but it's been
preserved in the museum. And I just want
to end with a couple of slides which
show where we have been struck over the
last 100 years. So from 1900 to now
roughly we've had a a number of falls
which suggests we should get about one
every 10 years coming down over the
UK over the whole world things are
completely peppered in them. This is
just 30 years worth of data and each
circle represents the size of the
explosion created by this bolide coming
down into the earth's atmosphere. So you
can see they're pretty randomly
scattered and quite a large number of
big detections have been made over the
sea. That's another whole story and
we'll come back to that with another
video. But for now, thanks very much for
listening and thanks to all the people
that contributed photographs and images
um and even the piece of the winch
meteorite that I have in my collection
here. So thanks a lot. Bye for now.